.. _utilities:
.. _monitoring:

Monitoring
==========


Due and Info
------------

The :ref:`due <due>` and :ref:`info <info>` commands allow you to interactively 
check on the current status of your backups.  Besides the :ref:`create <create>` 
command, it is good hygiene to run the :ref:`prune <prune>`, :ref:`compact 
<compact>` and :ref:`check <check>` on a regular basis.  Either the :ref:`due 
<due>` or :ref:`info <info>` command can be used to determine when each were 
last run.


.. _emborg_overdue:

Overdue
-------

.. _server_overdue:

Checking for Overdue Backups from the Server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*Emborg* contains an additional executable, *emborg-overdue*, that can be run on 
the destination server to determine whether the backups have been performed 
recently.  It reads its own settings file in ~/.config/emborg/overdue.conf that 
is also a Python file and may contain the following settings:

.. code-block:: text

    default_maintainer (email address -- mail is sent to this person upon failure)
    default_max_age (hours)
    dumper (email address -- mail is sent from this person)
    root (default directory for repositories)
    repositories (string or array of dictionaries)

Here is an example config file:

.. code-block:: python

    default_maintainer = 'root@continuum.com'
    dumper = 'dumper@continuum.com'
    default_max_age = 12  # hours
    root = '/mnt/borg-backups/repositories'
    repositories = [
        dict(host='mercury (/)', path='mercury-root-root'),
        dict(host='venus (/)', path='venus-root-root'),
        dict(host='earth (/)', path='earth-root-root'),
        dict(host='mars (/)', path='mars-root-root'),
        dict(host='jupiter (/)', path='jupiter-root-root'),
        dict(host='saturn (/)', path='saturn-root-root'),
        dict(host='uranus (/)', path='uranus-root-root'),
        dict(host='neptune (/)', path='neptune-root-root'),
        dict(host='pluto (/)', path='pluto-root-root'),
    ]

The dictionaries in *repositories* can contain the following fields: *host*, 
*path*, *maintainer*, *max_age*. *host* is an arbitrary string that is used as 
description of the repository.  It is included in the email that is sent when 
problems occur to identify the backup and so should be unique.  It is a good 
idea for it to contain both the host name and the source directory being backed 
up.  *path* is either the archive name or a full absolute path to the archive.  
If *path* is an absolute path, it is used, otherwise it is added to the end of 
*root*.  *maintainer* is an email address, an email is sent to this address if 
there is an issue.  *max_age* is the number of hours that may pass before an 
archive is considered overdue.

*repositories* can also be specified as multi-line string:

.. code-block:: python

    repositories = """
        # HOST      | NAME or PATH      | MAINTAINER           | MAXIMUM AGE (hours)
        mercury (/) | mercury-root-root |                      |
        venus (/)   | venus-root-root   |                      |
        earth (/)   | earth-root-root   |                      |
        mars (/)    | mars-root-root    |                      |
        jupiter (/) | jupiter-root-root |                      |
        saturn (/)  | saturn-root-root  |                      |
        uranus (/)  | uranus-root-root  |                      |
        neptune (/) | neptune-root-root |                      |
        pluto (/)   | pluto-root-root   |                      |
    """

If *repositories* is a string, it is first split on newlines, anything beyond 
a # is considered a comment and is ignored, and the finally the lines are split 
on '|' and the 4 values are expected to be given in order.  If the *maintainer* 
is not given, the *default_maintainer* is used. If *max_age* is not given, the 
*default_max_age* is used.

To run the program interactively, just make sure *emborg-overdue* has been 
installed and is on your path. Then type:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ emborg-overdue

It is also common to run *emborg-overdue* on a fixed schedule from cron. To do 
so, run:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ crontab -e

and add something like the following:

.. code-block:: text

    34 5 * * * ~/.local/bin/emborg-overdue --mail > ~/.local/share/emborg/emborg-overdue.out 2>&

or:

.. code-block:: text

    34 5 * * * ~/.local/bin/emborg-overdue --quiet --mail

to your crontab.

The first example runs emborg-overdue at 5:34 AM every day while saving the 
output into a file.  The use of the ``--mail`` option causes *emborg-overdue* to 
send mail to the maintainer when backups are found to be overdue.

.. note::

    By default Linux machines are not configured to send email.  If you are 
    using the ``--mail`` option to *emborg-overdue* be sure that to check that 
    it is working.  You can do so by sending mail to your self using the *mail* 
    command.  If you do not receive your test message you will need to set up 
    email forwarding on your machine.  You can do so by installing and 
    configuring `PostFix as a null client
    <http://www.postfix.org/STANDARD_CONFIGURATION_README.html#null_client>`_.

The second example is similar except the output is suppressed rather than being 
saved to a file.

Alternately you can run *emborg-overdue* from cron.daily (described in the 
:ref:`root example <root example>`).


.. _client_overdue:

Checking for Overdue Backups from the Client
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*emborg-overdue* can also be configured to run on the client.  This can be used 
when you do not control the server and so cannot run *emborg-overdue* there.  
The configuration is identical, except you give the path to the *latest.nt* 
file.  For example:

.. code-block:: python

    default_maintainer = 'me@continuum.com'
    dumper = 'me@continuum.com'
    default_max_age = 12  # hours
    root = '~/.local/share/emborg'
    repositories = [
        dict(host='earth (cache)', path='cache.latest.nt', max_age=0.2),
        dict(host='earth (home)', path='home.latest.nt'),
    ]

Again, *emborg-overdue* is generally run from cron.


.. _monitoring_services:

Monitoring Services
-------------------

Various monitoring services are available on the web.  You can configure 
*Emborg* to notify them when back-up jobs have started and finished.  These 
services allow you to monitor many of your routine tasks and assure they have 
completed recently and successfully.

There are many such services available and they are not difficult to add.  If 
the service you prefer is not currently available, feel free to request it on 
`Github <https://github.com/KenKundert/emborg/issues>`_ or add it yourself and 
issue a pull request.

.. _cronhub:

CronHub.io
~~~~~~~~~~

When you sign up with `cronhub.io <https://cronhub.io>`_ and configure the 
health check for your *Emborg* configuration, you will be given a UUID (a 32 
digit hexadecimal number partitioned into 5 parts by dashes).  Add that to the 
following setting in your configuration file:

.. code-block:: python

    cronhub_uuid = '51cb35d8-2975-110b-67a7-11b65d432027'

If given, this setting should be specified on an individual configuration.  It 
causes a report to be sent to *CronHub* each time an archive is created.  
A successful report is given if *Borg* returns with an exit status of 0 or 1, 
which implies that the command completed as expected, though there might have 
been issues with individual files or directories.  If *Borg* returns with an 
exit status of 2 or greater, a failure is reported.


.. _healthchecks:

HealthChecks.io
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When you sign up with `healthchecks.io <https://healthchecks.io>`_ and configure 
the health check for your *Emborg* configuration, you will be given a UUID (a 32 
digit hexadecimal number partitioned into 5 parts by dashes).  Add that to the 
following setting in your configuration file:

.. code-block:: python

    healthchecks_uuid = '51cb35d8-2975-110b-67a7-11b65d432027'

If given, this setting should be specified on an individual configuration.  It 
causes a report to be sent to *HealthChecks* each time an archive is created.  
A successful report is given if *Borg* returns with an exit status of 0 or 1, 
which implies that the command completed as expected, though there might have 
been issues with individual files or directories.  If *Borg* returns with an 
exit status of 2 or greater, a failure is reported.
